Plotto Masterplots is a web exhibit that replicates the simplest version of William Wallace Cook’s techniques from his Plotto (1928). In this program, we generate a new plot by combining a random Clause A + Clause B + Clause C.

The implications of this kind of tool pose several questions that bring together the fields of literary production and artificial intelligence. Can software imitate creative genius? Can it replicate the so-called “spiritual” capacities of human creativity? If so, what are the limits of AI? How might it improve human achievement? And how might it be a threat to human experience?

These are contemporary questions, but before today’s technologist asked, “What can we teach an artificial agent to do?” literary theorists like Aristotle, philosophers like Gottfried Leibniz, playwrights like Gustav Freytag, and writers like Cook were asking, “Can we formalize the human intellect?” Can we define the methods by which humans produce works of what we call creativity? More simply, can we know what we do? The history of formal methods as an attempt to precisely apprehend and describe human experience, whether this be the goal of a dramatic play or of a user interface, is a similar story to today’s goals to program human intellect into artificial agents. Once we know what we do, we can train artificial agents to do the same. Although the viewer might think that the advent of technology belongs to the last century, learning that the desire to imitate human intellect is far older perhaps restores or imparts to the viewer a kind of stability, diffusing the shock of a nebulous notion of technology and machinery and settling on the solid flesh and warm breath of the human person.

#### Links

Links to the [web exhibit](http://laurenpham.pythonanywhere.com/home) and [Github repository](https://github.com/phamlauren/Plotto_Generator).
